# Wastewater Infrastructure: Mapping the Nation's Sewersheds
"The [Clean Watershed Needs Survey(CWNS)](https://www.epa.gov/cwns/clean-watersheds-needs-survey-cwns-2022-report-and-data) provides an assessment of the capital investments necessary for states, the District of Columbia, and U.S. Territories to meet the Clean Water Act’s (CWA) water quality goals over the subsequent 20 years. These needs include projects and related infrastructure costs for wastewater publicly owned treatment works, stormwater treatment, nonpoint source control, and decentralized wastewater treatment.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has prepared the 2022 CWNS Report to Congress in compliance with CWA section 516(b)(1)(B) (33 U.S Code §1375) as well as CWA section 609, which was added by the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), P.L. 117-58, November 15, 2021. This Report summarizes the results of EPA’s 17th survey since the CWA was enacted in 1972."

As part of this survey, state-level teams submit technical information about publicly owned treatment works (POTWs). Some POTWs may discharge a portion of their wastewater downstream to other POTWs. When a treatment plant discharges less than 50% of its wastewater to another POTW, we refer to it as an 'endpoint', meaning that it is considered the final destination for wastewater prior to treatment and then discharge back into the environment, most frequently via direct discharge into a water body such as a river or ocean. The entire sewered area that contributes wastewater to a specific endpoint is referred to as a 'sewershed'. A sewershed may therefore include a single POTW and collection system or multiple POTWs and their collection systems. The relationship between POTWs and endpoints can be derived from CWNS reporting by accounting for reported discharge of wastewater between facilities.

Sewershed extents are not a part of reporting within the CWNS and are otherwise not statutorily required under the CWA. Understanding the sewered area related to an endpoint is critical to support the CWA, as well as multiple other agency and administration priorities. Sewershed boundaries can, for example, facilitate wastewater surveillance efforts and link community disease tracking to affected populations. The ability to map sewer systems can also be critical to infrastructure and urban planning, providing information on areas that can be developed or could benefit from resources to aid in economic development and information on infrastructure gaps.

EPA previously developed geospatial data for community water system service areas for the United States. The development of sewershed boundaries was built off of this experience, using machine learning models which are trained on existing sewershed data and utilizing advanced geospatial techniques to account for the complexities of determining what areas of the United States are sewered and which treatment plants they are served by. The output of this dataset is a spatial dataset of polygons that are constructed from hexagons with a resolution of ~0.11 km^2^. In total, 17,084 sewersheds are present in the data, with 3,192 obtained from a variety of public sources and 13,892 modeled using machine learning.


### Credits

This repository reused material from [GSA](https://www.gsa.gov/), [18F](https://18f.gsa.gov/) , [Lawrence Livermore National Lab](https://www.llnl.gov/), and from the [Consumer Financial Protection Bureau's policy](https://github.com/cfpb/source-code-policy).

### Disclaimer

The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) GitHub project code is provided on an "as is" basis and the user assumes responsibility for its use.  EPA has relinquished control of the information and no longer has responsibility to protect the integrity , confidentiality, or availability of the information.  Any reference to specific commercial products, processes, or services by service mark, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not constitute or imply their endorsement, recommendation or favoring by EPA.  The EPA seal and logo shall not be used in any manner to imply endorsement of any commercial product or activity by EPA or the United States Government.
